# bbglab/deepUMIcaller: Usage

## Introduction

**bbglab/deepUMIcaller** is a bioinformatics best-practice analysis pipeline to produce duplex consensus reads and call mutations.

## Samplesheet input

You will need to create a samplesheet with information about the samples you would like to analyse before running the pipeline. Use this parameter to specify its location. It has to be a comma-separated file with 3 columns, and a header row as shown in the examples below.

```console
--input '[path to samplesheet file]'
```

Example:

```csv
sample,fastq_1,fastq_2,read_structure
sample1,sample1_R1.fastq.gz,sample1_R2.fastq.gz,8M1S+T 8M1S+T
sample2,sample2_R1.fastq.gz,sample2_R2.fastq.gz,8M1S+T 8M1S+T
sample3,sample3_R1.fastq.gz,sample3_R2.fastq.gz,8M1S+T 8M1S+T
```

| Column    | Description                                                                                                                                                                            |
| --------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `sample`  | Custom sample name. This entry will be identical for multiple sequencing libraries/runs from the same sample. Spaces in sample names are automatically converted to underscores (`_`). |
| `fastq_1` | Full path to FastQ file for Illumina short reads 1. File has to be gzipped and have the extension ".fastq.gz" or ".fq.gz".                                                             |
| `fastq_2` | Full path to FastQ file for Illumina short reads 2. File has to be gzipped and have the extension ".fastq.gz" or ".fq.gz".                                                             |
| `read_structure` | Duplex sequencing read structure as defined in [fgbio read structures](https://github.com/fulcrumgenomics/fgbio/wiki/Read-Structures). This will change depending on the duplex sequencing technology used for the library preparation.                                                     |

An [example samplesheet](../assets/samplesheet.csv) has been provided with the pipeline.

## Running the pipeline

The typical way of running deepUMIcaller is by starting from the raw paired-end FASTQ files of duplex sequencing libraries. You should prepare the input csv file as described above.

```console
nextflow run bbglab/deepUMIcaller \
  -profile singularity \
  --input input.csv \
  --ref_fasta hs38DH.fa \
  --targetsfile file.bed \
  --outdir results/ 
```

The first time that the pipeline is run and also when running with more than 50 samples we suggest requesting at least 8 CPUs and 20 GBs of memory to ensure that there is no problem in handling the multiple submissions and also for pulling containers.
Otherwise when the pipeline is run with a small number of samples less resources should be enough.

## Running the pipeline. Additional run modes

Additionally to the end to end mode. deepUMIcaller allows to start the pipeline from other specific steps among the following options:

`groupreadsbyumi`, `allmoleculesfile`, `filterconsensus`, `calling`

### Start with GroupByUMI (`groupreadsbyumi`)

```console
nextflow run bbglab/deepUMIcaller \
  -profile singularity \
  --input input.csv \
  --ref_fasta  hs38DH.fa \
  --targetsfile file.bed \
  --outdir results/ \
  --step groupreadsbyumi
```

In this case, the input.csv samplesheet must contain the following columns:

```csv
sample,bam
sample1,sample1.bam
```

### Start with duplex consensus reads (`allmoleculesfile`)

Starting at this step allows the user to apply mapability filters to the duplex consensus reads by the desired AS-XS threshold and then apply all the posterior steps, including the filtering of duplex consensus reads by family sizes and the variant calling.

To get the maximum amount of information from the libraries, the input to this step should be consensus reads where very little filters have been applied to take full advantage of the calling in high quality duplex reads, but then readjusting the mutation counts including the non-duplex ones.

```console
nextflow run bbglab/deepUMIcaller \
  -profile singularity \
  --input input.csv \
  --ref_fasta hs38DH.fa \
  --targetsfile file.bed \
  --outdir results/ \
  --step allmoleculesfile
```

The input.csv samplesheet must contain the following columns:

```csv
sample,duplexbam,csi
sample1,sample1.duplex_consensus.bam,sample1.duplex_consensus.bam.csi
```

### Start with the filter consensus step (`filterconsensus`)

Starting at this step allows the user to update the duplex quality threshold and then perform the variant calling downstream. This can be run either from the BAM file generated by deepUMIcaller or by any other pipeline where the consensus are built with fgbio.

In case users have done more than one library preparation with the same sample and want to analyze the data together, they can merge the duplex BAM files outside the pipeline and start running it from this point.

In this case, the input.csv samplesheet must contain the following columns:

```csv
sample,bam
sample1,sample1.bam
```

### Start with VarDict variant calling (`calling`)

It is also possible to start directly with the variant calling, however you should make sure that the reads are filtered to the appropriate duplex quality and are ready for being used for the variant calling without any further processing.

```console
nextflow run bbglab/deepUMIcaller \
  -profile singularity \
  --input input.csv \
  --ref_fasta hs38DH.fa \
  --targetsfile file.bed \
  --outdir results/ \
  --step calling
```

The input.csv samplesheet must contain the following columns:

```csv
sample,duplexbam,csi
sample1,sample1.duplex_consensus.bam,sample1.duplex_consensus.bam.csi
```

## Running the pipeline. Custom run modes

Since we are currently facing the issue of having to run multiple libraries of the same sample for getting to a higher depth, we implemented an option in deepUMIcaller to automatically merge duplex BAM files of libraries that come from the same original sample.

This is managed by the `parent_dna` column in the input csv file.

For each sample, this column will be empty in case it does not need to be concatenated or otherwise it will contain the name of the resulting sample after concatenation. Taking the definitions from this column samples will be grouped and whenever there are two or more samples with the same `parent_dna` their AM BAMs will be concatenated and added to the channel of BAM files that will go to downstream analysis.
In addition to this, deepUMIcaller will also output the CSV with all the AM BAMs (including the merged ones) also simplifying the process of BAM concat outside deepUMIcaller and the potential need for repeating the calling or filtering of reada with different parameters.

**Note that: the names in parent_dna column must be different from all the names of samples in column sample. This is not enforced yet, but we will do it to prevent unwanted merges.**

Example CSV:

```csv
sample,fastq_1,fastq_2,read_structure,parent_dna
CH_pat1,B5_1_downsampled.fastq.gz,B5_2_downsampled.fastq.gz,8M1S+T 8M1S+T,
CH_pat2a,G5_A_1_downsampled.fastq.gz,G5_A_2_downsampled.fastq.gz,8M1S+T 8M1S+T,CH_pat2
CH_pat2B,G5_B_1_downsampled.fastq.gz,G5_B_2_downsampled.fastq.gz,8M1S+T 8M1S+T,CH_pat2
```

Here, samples CH_pat2a and CH_pat2b will be merged and the resulting variant calling will be run for : CH_pat1, CH_pat2a, CH_pat2b and CH_pat2 (which is the merge of 2a and 2b).

## Other required parameters

### Reference fasta file

The reference fasta has to be **uncompressed** and it must contain it's own bwa index in the same directory.

### Targets BED file

It should be a BED file in BED4-5-6 format with a single row per exon or continuous genomic region that was targeted.

To get more accurate metrics for on target proportion and possibly other downstream sequencing metrics we recommend providing a BED file with the targeted regions with an extension of 250 bp on each boundary. This will include reads that partially overlap with the target region but not fully.

### Low complexity file

This file comes from RepeatMasker regions and informs of genomic regions that are repetitive and can cause problems when aligning or calling variants in them.

### Low mappability

This file comes from an article describing [The ENCODE Blacklist: Identification of Problematic Regions of the Genome](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-019-45839-z#data-availability).
Use the appropriate version for your genome version.

### Global exons file

This file will be used to report the depth of discarded reads because of AS-XS filter. This can be useful for seeing which regions of the genome outside the panel you targeted are getting some coverage, that is lost because of ambiguous mappability.

## Additional Nextflow configurations

### Updating the pipeline

When you run the above command, Nextflow automatically pulls the pipeline code from GitHub and stores it as a cached version. When running the pipeline after this, it will always use the cached version if available - even if the pipeline has been updated since. To make sure that you're running the latest version of the pipeline, make sure that you regularly update the cached version of the pipeline:

```console
nextflow pull bbglab/deepUMIcaller
```

### Reproducibility

It is a good idea to specify a pipeline version when running the pipeline on your data. This ensures that a specific version of the pipeline code and software are used when you run your pipeline. If you keep using the same tag, you'll be running the same version of the pipeline, even if there have been changes to the code since.

First, go to the [bbglab/deepUMIcaller releases page](https://github.com/bbglab/deepUMIcaller/releases) and find the latest version number - numeric only (eg. `1.3.1`). Then specify this when running the pipeline with `-r` (one hyphen) - eg. `-r 1.3.1`.

This version number will be logged in reports when you run the pipeline, so that you'll know what you used when you look back in the future.

### Core Nextflow arguments

> **NB:** These options are part of Nextflow and use a _single_ hyphen (pipeline parameters use a double-hyphen).

#### `-profile`

Use this parameter to choose a configuration profile. Profiles can give configuration presets for different compute environments.

Several generic profiles are bundled with the pipeline which instruct the pipeline to use software packaged using different methods (Docker, Singularity, Podman, Shifter, Charliecloud, Conda) - see below. When using Biocontainers, most of these software packaging methods pull Docker containers from quay.io e.g [FastQC](https://quay.io/repository/biocontainers/fastqc) except for Singularity which directly downloads Singularity images via https hosted by the [Galaxy project](https://depot.galaxyproject.org/singularity/) and Conda which downloads and installs software locally from [Bioconda](https://bioconda.github.io/).

> We highly recommend the use of Docker or Singularity containers for full pipeline reproducibility, however when this is not possible, Conda is also supported.

The pipeline also dynamically loads configurations from [https://github.com/nf-core/configs](https://github.com/nf-core/configs) when it runs, making multiple config profiles for various institutional clusters available at run time. For more information and to see if your system is available in these configs please see the [nf-core/configs documentation](https://github.com/nf-core/configs#documentation).

Note that multiple profiles can be loaded, for example: `-profile test,docker` - the order of arguments is important!
They are loaded in sequence, so later profiles can overwrite earlier profiles.

If `-profile` is not specified, the pipeline will run locally and expect all software to be installed and available on the `PATH`. This is _not_ recommended.

- `docker`
  - A generic configuration profile to be used with [Docker](https://docker.com/)
- `singularity`
  - A generic configuration profile to be used with [Singularity](https://sylabs.io/docs/)
- `podman`
  - A generic configuration profile to be used with [Podman](https://podman.io/)
- `shifter`
  - A generic configuration profile to be used with [Shifter](https://nersc.gitlab.io/development/shifter/how-to-use/)
- `charliecloud`
  - A generic configuration profile to be used with [Charliecloud](https://hpc.github.io/charliecloud/)
- `conda`
  - A generic configuration profile to be used with [Conda](https://conda.io/docs/). Please only use Conda as a last resort i.e. when it's not possible to run the pipeline with Docker, Singularity, Podman, Shifter or Charliecloud.
- `test`
  - A profile with a complete configuration for automated testing
  - Includes links to test data so needs no other parameters

#### `-resume`

Specify this when restarting a pipeline. Nextflow will use cached results from any pipeline steps where the inputs are the same, continuing from where it got to previously. For input to be considered the same, not only the names must be identical but the files' contents as well. For more info about this parameter, see [this blog post](https://www.nextflow.io/blog/2019/demystifying-nextflow-resume.html).

You can also supply a run name to resume a specific run: `-resume [run-name]`. Use the `nextflow log` command to show previous run names.

#### `-c`

Specify the path to a specific config file (this is a core Nextflow command). See the [nf-core website documentation](https://nf-co.re/usage/configuration) for more information.

### Custom configuration

#### Resource requests

Whilst the default requirements set within the pipeline will hopefully work for most people and with most input data, you may find that you want to customise the compute resources that the pipeline requests. Each step in the pipeline has a default set of requirements for number of CPUs, memory and time. For most of the steps in the pipeline, if the job exits with any of the [error codes specified here](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq/blob/4c27ef5610c87db00c3c5a3eed10b1d161abf575/conf/base.config#L18) it will automatically be resubmitted with higher requests (2 x original, then 3 x original). If it still fails after the third attempt then the pipeline execution is stopped.

For example, if the nf-core/rnaseq pipeline is failing after multiple re-submissions of the `STAR_ALIGN` process due to an exit code of `137` this would indicate that there is an out of memory issue:

```console
[62/149eb0] NOTE: Process `NFCORE_RNASEQ:RNASEQ:ALIGN_STAR:STAR_ALIGN (WT_REP1)` terminated with an error exit status (137) -- Execution is retried (1)
Error executing process > 'NFCORE_RNASEQ:RNASEQ:ALIGN_STAR:STAR_ALIGN (WT_REP1)'

Caused by:
    Process `NFCORE_RNASEQ:RNASEQ:ALIGN_STAR:STAR_ALIGN (WT_REP1)` terminated with an error exit status (137)

Command executed:
    STAR \
        --genomeDir star \
        --readFilesIn WT_REP1_trimmed.fq.gz  \
        --runThreadN 2 \
        --outFileNamePrefix WT_REP1. \
        <TRUNCATED>

Command exit status:
    137

Command output:
    (empty)

Command error:
    .command.sh: line 9:  30 Killed    STAR --genomeDir star --readFilesIn WT_REP1_trimmed.fq.gz --runThreadN 2 --outFileNamePrefix WT_REP1. <TRUNCATED>
Work dir:
    /home/pipelinetest/work/9d/172ca5881234073e8d76f2a19c88fb

Tip: you can replicate the issue by changing to the process work dir and entering the command `bash .command.run`
```

To bypass this error you would need to find exactly which resources are set by the `STAR_ALIGN` process. The quickest way is to search for `process STAR_ALIGN` in the [nf-core/rnaseq Github repo](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq/search?q=process+STAR_ALIGN).
We have standardised the structure of Nextflow DSL2 pipelines such that all module files will be present in the `modules/` directory and so, based on the search results, the file we want is `modules/nf-core/software/star/align/main.nf`.
If you click on the link to that file you will notice that there is a `label` directive at the top of the module that is set to [`label process_high`](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq/blob/4c27ef5610c87db00c3c5a3eed10b1d161abf575/modules/nf-core/software/star/align/main.nf#L9).
The [Nextflow `label`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#label) directive allows us to organise workflow processes in separate groups which can be referenced in a configuration file to select and configure subset of processes having similar computing requirements.
The default values for the `process_high` label are set in the pipeline's [`base.config`](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq/blob/4c27ef5610c87db00c3c5a3eed10b1d161abf575/conf/base.config#L33-L37) which in this case is defined as 72GB.
Providing you haven't set any other standard nf-core parameters to **cap** the [maximum resources](https://nf-co.re/usage/configuration#max-resources) used by the pipeline then we can try and bypass the `STAR_ALIGN` process failure by creating a custom config file that sets at least 72GB of memory, in this case increased to 100GB.
The custom config below can then be provided to the pipeline via the [`-c`](#-c) parameter as highlighted in previous sections.

```nextflow
process {
    withName: 'NFCORE_RNASEQ:RNASEQ:ALIGN_STAR:STAR_ALIGN' {
        memory = 100.GB
    }
}
```

> **NB:** We specify the full process name i.e. `NFCORE_RNASEQ:RNASEQ:ALIGN_STAR:STAR_ALIGN` in the config file because this takes priority over the short name (`STAR_ALIGN`) and allows existing configuration using the full process name to be correctly overridden.
>
> If you get a warning suggesting that the process selector isn't recognised check that the process name has been specified correctly.

#### Updating containers

The [Nextflow DSL2](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/dsl2.html) implementation of this pipeline uses one container per process which makes it much easier to maintain and update software dependencies. If for some reason you need to use a different version of a particular tool with the pipeline then you just need to identify the `process` name and override the Nextflow `container` definition for that process using the `withName` declaration. For example, in the [nf-core/viralrecon](https://nf-co.re/viralrecon) pipeline a tool called [Pangolin](https://github.com/cov-lineages/pangolin) has been used during the COVID-19 pandemic to assign lineages to SARS-CoV-2 genome sequenced samples. Given that the lineage assignments change quite frequently it doesn't make sense to re-release the nf-core/viralrecon everytime a new version of Pangolin has been released. However, you can override the default container used by the pipeline by creating a custom config file and passing it as a command-line argument via `-c custom.config`.

1. Check the default version used by the pipeline in the module file for [Pangolin](https://github.com/nf-core/viralrecon/blob/a85d5969f9025409e3618d6c280ef15ce417df65/modules/nf-core/software/pangolin/main.nf#L14-L19)
2. Find the latest version of the Biocontainer available on [Quay.io](https://quay.io/repository/biocontainers/pangolin?tag=latest&tab=tags)
3. Create the custom config accordingly:

   - For Docker:

     ```nextflow
     process {
         withName: PANGOLIN {
             container = 'quay.io/biocontainers/pangolin:3.0.5--pyhdfd78af_0'
         }
     }
     ```

   - For Singularity:

     ```nextflow
     process {
         withName: PANGOLIN {
             container = 'https://depot.galaxyproject.org/singularity/pangolin:3.0.5--pyhdfd78af_0'
         }
     }
     ```

   - For Conda:

     ```nextflow
     process {
         withName: PANGOLIN {
             conda = 'bioconda::pangolin=3.0.5'
         }
     }
     ```

> **NB:** If you wish to periodically update individual tool-specific results (e.g. Pangolin) generated by the pipeline then you must ensure to keep the `work/` directory otherwise the `-resume` ability of the pipeline will be compromised and it will restart from scratch.

#### nf-core/configs

In most cases, you will only need to create a custom config as a one-off but if you and others within your organisation are likely to be running nf-core pipelines regularly and need to use the same settings regularly it may be a good idea to request that your custom config file is uploaded to the `nf-core/configs` git repository. Before you do this please can you test that the config file works with your pipeline of choice using the `-c` parameter. You can then create a pull request to the `nf-core/configs` repository with the addition of your config file, associated documentation file (see examples in [`nf-core/configs/docs`](https://github.com/nf-core/configs/tree/master/docs)), and amending [`nfcore_custom.config`](https://github.com/nf-core/configs/blob/master/nfcore_custom.config) to include your custom profile.

See the main [Nextflow documentation](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/config.html) for more information about creating your own configuration files.

If you have any questions or issues please send us a message on [Slack](https://nf-co.re/join/slack) on the [`#configs` channel](https://nfcore.slack.com/channels/configs).

### Running in the background

Nextflow handles job submissions and supervises the running jobs. The Nextflow process must run until the pipeline is finished.

The Nextflow `-bg` flag launches Nextflow in the background, detached from your terminal so that the workflow does not stop if you log out of your session. The logs are saved to a file.

Alternatively, you can use `screen` / `tmux` or similar tool to create a detached session which you can log back into at a later time.
Some HPC setups also allow you to run nextflow within a cluster job submitted your job scheduler (from where it submits more jobs).

### Nextflow memory requirements

In some cases, the Nextflow Java virtual machines can start to request a large amount of memory.
We recommend adding the following line to your environment to limit this (typically in `~/.bashrc` or `~./bash_profile`):

```console
NXF_OPTS='-Xms1g -Xmx4g'
```
